== Schizo

Schizo is a libary that aids in using DCI (data, context and interaction) in Ruby/Rails projects.  It aims
to overcome some of the shortcomings of using plain <tt>Object#extend</tt>, namely the issue that extending
a role can permenantly alter a class.

== Quickstart

Dive in...

  class User < ActiveRecord::Base
    include Schizo::Data
  end

  module Poster
    extend Schizo::Role

    extended do
      has_many :posts
    end

    def post_count_in_english
      "#{name} has #{posts.count} post(s)"
    end
  end

  user = User.find(1)
  user.as(Poster) do |poster|
    poster.respond_to?(:posts) # => true
    user.respond_to?(:posts)   # => false

    poster.respond_to?(:post_count_in_english) # => true
    user.respond_to?(:post_count_in_english)   # => false

    poster.kind_of?(User)     # => true
    poster.instance_of?(User) # => true
    
    poster.class.name # => "User"
  end

== The Problem

So what's wrong with just using <tt>Object#extend</tt> ?  Nothing, until you want to alter an instance's class
as a part of adorning it with a role... which happens often when using ActiveRecord.

Consider the following use of DCI and ActiveRecord with plain old <tt>Object#extend</tt>:

  class User < ActiveRecord::Base
  end

  module Poster
    def self.extended(object)
      object.class.class_eval do
        has_many :posts
      end
    end

    def post_count_in_english
      "#{name} has #{posts.count} post(s)"
    end
  end

  user1 = User.find(1)
  user1.extend(Poster)
  user1.respond_to?(:posts) # Ok

  user2 = User.find(2)
  user2.respond_to?(:posts) # Oops, extending user1 ended up changing *all* users!

That goes against the core concept in DCI that your data should only be injected with behavior for a specific
context.

== The Magic

So how does Schizo work?  It creates <i>facade classes</i> and <i>facade objects</i> that stand in for the
classes and objects you really want.  The facades try to quack as best they can like the real objects/classes.

This is easier to explain in an example (continuing from the Quickstart example):

  user = User.find(1)
  user.as(Poster) do |poster|
    poster.kind_of?(User)     # => true
    poster.instance_of?(User) # => true
    
    poster.class.name # => "User"
    poster.class      # => Schizo::Facades::User::Poster
  end

<tt>Schizo::Facades::User::Poster</tt> inherits from +User+, that's why <tt>poster.kind_of?(User)</tt> works natrually.
<tt>poster.instance_of?(User)</tt> works because of the facade consciously trying to quack like +User+.

== Facades and Objects

So knowing you're working with a facade instead of the original object, some of the gotchas become obvious.

  class Foo
    include Schizo::Data
    attr_reader :bar
    def initialize
      @bar = "low"
    end
  end

  module Baz
    extend Schizo::Role
    def set_bar(value)
      @bar = value
    end
  end

  foo = Foo.new
  baz = foo.as(Baz)
  baz.set_bar("high")
  baz.bar # => "high"
  foo.bar # => "low"

Makes perfect sense, right?  But what about this...

  foo = Foo.new
  foo.as(Baz) do |baz|
    baz.set_bar("high")
  end
  foo.bar # => "high"

What?!  Nah, it's really simple.  At the end of the code block, +baz.actualize+ is called.  All +#actualize+ does
is copy over the instances variables from the facade to the real object.

You can get the exact same affect by doing:

  foo = Foo.new
  baz = foo.as(Baz)
  baz.set_bar("high")
  baz.actualize
  foo.bar # => "high"

Hmm, maybe +#actualize+ should be renamed +#converge+... what do you think?

== Documentation

{\http://doc.stochasticbytes.com/schizo/index.html}[http://doc.stochasticbytes.com/schizo/index.html]

== Contact

{@cjbottaro}[http://twitter.com/cjbottaro]

== Liscense

MIT or something
